[Music]
to survive here you have to be prepared
to die here
but the Sun can return as quickly as the
storm arrived and a rise of just a few
degrees is enough to spark a Thor even
underground
[Music]
frozen solid a mountain stone wetter it
has the most extraordinary survival
technique of all
the ability to come back from the dead
[Music]
only in a specialized filming chamber
can we capture its extraordinary talent
the waiter has developed special
proteins which prevent ice crystals from
forming inside its cells a remarkable
trick for a creature whose ancestors
once lived in prehistoric warm wet
forests but when New Zealand's mountains
grew up beneath them around five million
years ago they were forced to come up
with this incredible ability to survive
near lethal temperatures defrosting uses
up a lot of energy so mountain snow
berries are a welcome sight the weather
needs to stock up while it can
the next Antarctic storm could be the
return of winter
[Music]
it can tolerate over 80% of its body
freezing solid and can do so day in and
day out for weeks at a time
[Music]
now where else who New Zealand does life
go to such extremes to survive oh no you
can you can definitely smell it Joe
I genuinely feel like I'm gonna vomit
death that's disgusting no no no no
right it's enough of that
south africa can be one of the harshest
environments on the planet with
temperatures soaring during the day and
sometimes plummeting at night but the
animals that live here have evolved to
withstand these elements and over
millions of years come up with some
weird and wonderful ways in which to
survive in the savannas
the savanna is the largest biome in
South Africa covering over one-third of
the entire country it is a mixture of
shrubs and trees but is dominated by
grassland and it's these long grasses
that other hunting grounds for one of
South Africa's most peculiar creatures
the secretary bird endemic to
sub-saharan Africa and unmistakable in
appearance these large birds are in fact
related to Raptors but unlike other
species in the family secretary birds
spend most of their time on the ground
walking around in search of prey nesting
pairs will make for life and will be
seen stalking together when raising
chicks when hunting they use their
exceptionally long legs to strike their
prey delivering a fatal blow with a
single kick their kicks are indeed that
powerful they are the equivalent to five
times its own body weight and the strike
is delivered in 15 milliseconds that's
one-tenth of a blink of an eye making
the secretary bird one of the most
remarkable creatures that live on the
savannas
but here in South Africa even familiar
animals have unusual features now the
leopard tortoise is the only member of
the tortoise family that doesn't have a
scoot on the top of its neck scoops are
the keratin plates which make up ER
tortoises shell tortoise species around
the world are terrestrial and will only
head to water to drink but due to the
lack of this upper scoot the leopard
tortoise has the ability to raise its
head I will often be seen taking a dip
during the heat of the day South Africa
is known for its megafauna
but as night begins to fall a host of
other species come to life
including those that live on the forest
floor the African giant millipede is the
largest millipede species in the world
they can grow up to around 12 inches
long and live between five to seven
years in the wild and they have around
three to four hundred legs with four per
body segment and they don't breathe
through lungs like you and I instead
they have these tiny pore like
structures located along the length of
their body known as sphericals which
they breathe through and there are
nocturnal species and we've seen quite a
few just exploring the environment of
foraging so we're gonna let this one go
now millipedes are amongst the most
diverse group of arthropods in the world
being one of the earliest animals to
walk on land as a result of having poor
eyesight they communicate through touch
they navigate their environment by
feeling with their legs and then 10i and
are able to taste their surroundings
with their bodies as decomposes they
feed on Deborah's collected on the
ground
recycling dead waste which becomes new
soil making them vital for the Savannah
ecosystem the open grasslands of Africa
are one of the most diverse ecosystems
on earth they support millions of
species which are all intrinsically
connected but they are also amongst some
of the fastest changing and
unpredictable African environments parts
of large-scale African savannah have
disappeared by 75% in the last 50 years
areas which are vital for the species
which live there one animal has suffered
greatly across the continent due to
extreme habitat loss but in South Africa
their population is increasing the
giraffe one of the most distinctive
species across the continent and also
the tallest mammal to walk our planet
the easiest way to tell the difference
between a male and a female is the horns
on top of their head called the
ossicones
now a female will have Tufts of hair on
top whereas the males will be completely
bald and that's all due to fighting
known for their remarkable biology they
have evolved some peculiar adaptations
which allow them to graze without
competition their huge long tongues are
pigmented a colored dark gluey color
which protects them from the Sun and
this enables them to eat high in the
treetops all day long not only are they
able to withstand the scorching Sun
whilst they eat but their skin is truly
extraordinary
it was long wondered why giraffes had
their spectacular patterns but we'd seen
their striking patches may help them
stay cool it was found that underneath
each darkened patch they had sweat
glands but the size of these glands were
significantly larger suggesting that
indeed their skin plays a vital part in
them regulating their body temperature
and therefore surviving giraffes are
capable of travelling more than 10 miles
a day as they browse acacia trees but
when the giraffe begins to feed the
acacia tree releases powerful chemicals
to deter its predator and as it does it
sends signals down through its root
Network warning the surrounding trees
but as the giraffe eats it spreads seeds
and can even pollinate the acacia scours
in this evolutionary arms race every
single living thing is connected as they
evolved as one over
of years and without the giraffe the
open plains would look very different
[Music]
[Applause]
to help her in her quest she's equipped
with three superpowers first an amazing
approach to getting about Portia is a
jumping spider
able to leap up to 50 times our own body
length nowhere seems beyond her reach
next her second superpower supervised
sight essential if she's to distinguish
her prey in all this cutter because her
prey doesn't stray Portia is a spider
eating spider this raises a few problems
her lunch is three times her size packed
with venom and surrounded by a sticky
trap mission impossible
not at all because of her third
superpower Porter is a genius
she can map her world in three
dimensions and formulate a plan of
attack
[Music]
she can have an idea
the web builder is blind it won't have a
clue that she's coming
[Music]
right on target and safely behind those
fangs but a mind as active as Portia's
can always do with more brain food here
there's no anchor point for the abseil
but Porsche has another idea instead of
going to the spider
[Music]
she will bring the spider to her she
plucks the strands to imitate struggling
prey drawing the spider in to its death
[Music]
a mudskipper a fish that spends most of
its life out of the sea it can walk on
land and breathe air its life is very
different from that of most fish a fish
out of water maybe but they thrive here
in Japan
so what's made this upheaval worthwhile
the answer lies in the mud
as the tide retreats it exposes mud
flaps sunlight hits the rich silt and
tiny plants and animals flourish they're
all food for a mudskipper but life on
land is not without problems it's hard
work to find a mate jumping high above
the mud will get you noticed
[Music]
with eyes perched on the top of their
heads the mudskippers keep a lookout for
both friend and foe and males fight
those who intrude on their territory
[Applause]
they must also take care and not to dry
out in the Sun rolling in the Oilers
keeps the skin cool and moist for this
smaller species a better option is to
retreat underground so he digs himself a
tunnel down into the mud
[Music]
his heap of spoil is an indication of
the extent of his excavations with the
tide flooding the tunnel twice a day
maintenance is a real burden
[Music]
[Applause]